
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260164621

Introduction to the American Legal System

Chapter · January 2006

CITATION

1
READS

6,094

2 authors, including:

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Brexit View project

EU Law - Textbook View project

Frank Emmert

Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis

172 PUBLICATIONS   124 CITATIONS   

SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Frank Emmert on 13 February 2014.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260164621_Introduction_to_the_American_Legal_System?enrichId=rgreq-dcfb8ec9051d6968739909e486be2a2f-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDE2NDYyMTtBUzoxMDE3NjU0NDU4NDkxMDBAMTQwMTI3NDE4MjIzNw%3D%3D&el=1_x_2&_esc=publicationCoverPdf
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260164621_Introduction_to_the_American_Legal_System?enrichId=rgreq-dcfb8ec9051d6968739909e486be2a2f-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDE2NDYyMTtBUzoxMDE3NjU0NDU4NDkxMDBAMTQwMTI3NDE4MjIzNw%3D%3D&el=1_x_3&_esc=publicationCoverPdf
https://www.researchgate.net/project/Brexit-16?enrichId=rgreq-dcfb8ec9051d6968739909e486be2a2f-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDE2NDYyMTtBUzoxMDE3NjU0NDU4NDkxMDBAMTQwMTI3NDE4MjIzNw%3D%3D&el=1_x_9&_esc=publicationCoverPdf
https://www.researchgate.net/project/EU-Law-Textbook?enrichId=rgreq-dcfb8ec9051d6968739909e486be2a2f-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDE2NDYyMTtBUzoxMDE3NjU0NDU4NDkxMDBAMTQwMTI3NDE4MjIzNw%3D%3D&el=1_x_9&_esc=publicationCoverPdf
https://www.researchgate.net/?enrichId=rgreq-dcfb8ec9051d6968739909e486be2a2f-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDE2NDYyMTtBUzoxMDE3NjU0NDU4NDkxMDBAMTQwMTI3NDE4MjIzNw%3D%3D&el=1_x_1&_esc=publicationCoverPdf
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Frank_Emmert2?enrichId=rgreq-dcfb8ec9051d6968739909e486be2a2f-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDE2NDYyMTtBUzoxMDE3NjU0NDU4NDkxMDBAMTQwMTI3NDE4MjIzNw%3D%3D&el=1_x_4&_esc=publicationCoverPdf
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Frank_Emmert2?enrichId=rgreq-dcfb8ec9051d6968739909e486be2a2f-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDE2NDYyMTtBUzoxMDE3NjU0NDU4NDkxMDBAMTQwMTI3NDE4MjIzNw%3D%3D&el=1_x_5&_esc=publicationCoverPdf
https://www.researchgate.net/institution/Indiana_University-Purdue_University_Indianapolis?enrichId=rgreq-dcfb8ec9051d6968739909e486be2a2f-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDE2NDYyMTtBUzoxMDE3NjU0NDU4NDkxMDBAMTQwMTI3NDE4MjIzNw%3D%3D&el=1_x_6&_esc=publicationCoverPdf
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Frank_Emmert2?enrichId=rgreq-dcfb8ec9051d6968739909e486be2a2f-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDE2NDYyMTtBUzoxMDE3NjU0NDU4NDkxMDBAMTQwMTI3NDE4MjIzNw%3D%3D&el=1_x_7&_esc=publicationCoverPdf
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Frank_Emmert2?enrichId=rgreq-dcfb8ec9051d6968739909e486be2a2f-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI2MDE2NDYyMTtBUzoxMDE3NjU0NDU4NDkxMDBAMTQwMTI3NDE4MjIzNw%3D%3D&el=1_x_10&_esc=publicationCoverPdf


Langenscheidt
ALPMANN

Fac hworterbuc h
Kompakt
Recht

Englisch
Englisch - Deutsch
Deutsch - Englisch

stuart G. Bugg, ,.0., IoJ, (Hons), M. Jur (Dist.)
Heike Simon, Maitre de conf6rences associ6e (Lille 2)

m
Langenscheid

Berlin-MUnchen.Wien
Ztirich.New York

,€,t
ALPMANN SCHMIDT



Eingetragene (registierte) warenzeichen sowie Gebrauchsmuster und
patente sind tn diesem w1rterbuch nicht ausdriicklich gekennzeichnet.
Daraus kann nicht gesch/ossen werden, dass die betreffenden Bezeich'
nungen frei sind oder frei verwendet werden kdnnen.

Das werk ist urheberrechtlich geschfttrt. Jetde verwendung auBerhatb der
Grenzen des lJrhebenechtsgeseEes bedart der vorherlgen schriftlichen
Zustimmung des Verlages. Dies gilt besonders fhr 0berseZungen, Ver-
vietfdltigungen, auch von Teilen des Werkes, Mikroverfilmungen, Bear'

beitungen sonstiger fut sowie ftr die Einspeicherung in eleKronische
Systeme.

Bibliografische lnformation Der Deutschen Bibliothek
Die Deutsche Bibliothek verzeichnet diese Publikation in der Deutschen

Natlonalbibliografie;detaillierte bibliografische Daten sind im lnternet fiber

http://dnb.ddb.de abrufbar.

O 2006 Langenscheidt Fachverlag GmbH, M0nchen und Alpmann und
schmidt Juristische Lehrgiingeverlagsgesellschaft mbH & co. KG, Munster

Druck: Graph. Betriebe Langenscheidt, Berchtesgaden/Obb.
Printed in,Germany

ISBN-1 3: 978-3-861 1 7-240-6 (Buch)
ISBN-1O: W6117-24V2

ISBN-13: 978-3-86117-241-3 (Buch + CD-ROM)
ISBN-1O: 3-861 1 7-241-0
(Langenscheidt)

ISBN-1 3: 978-3-89476-797-6 (Buch)
ISBN-10: H9476-797-9

ISBN-13: 978-3-89476-79&-3 (Buch + CD-ROM)
ISBN-10: H9476-798-7
(Alpmann Schmidt)

q

No
oo
oo
o

6

$

ci

N



lnhalt / Contents

Vorwort 6
Hinweise zur Benu?ung des Wdrterbuches. 8
Bedeutung der Zeichen 17
lm W6rterbuch veruvendete Abkrirzungen 18
Einf0hrung in das englische Recht(ssystem). 21
Einf0hrung in das amerikanische Recht(ssystem). . . . 74
Einftihrung in das deutsche Recht(ssystem). 129
WorterbuchEnglisch-Deutsch.. ..207
W6rterbuchDeutsch-Englisch.. ..399
Anhang ... . ... 603

Foreword ....... 7
Using the dictionary 13
Meaning of symbols 1T
Abbreviations used in this dictionary 18
lntroduction to the English Legal System 49
lntroduction to the American LegalSystem 104
lntroductiontotheGerman Legalsystem ....... 167
English-GermanDictionary ......2O7
German-English Dictionary 399
Appendix .......603



INTRODUCTION TO THE AMERICAN LEGAL SYSTEM
by Prof. Dr. Frank Emmert, LL.M.1 and Professor Toni M. Fine, J.D.2

Contents

l. An Overview of Key Differences Between Anglo-American
and Gontinental European Legal Systems
1. Case law Versus Statute Law
2. Precedent and the Principle of Stare Decr'sis
3. Federal Law, State Law, and the Distribution of Legislative and Judicial

Authority
4. The Structure of Federal and State Courts
5. The Adversarial System and the Role of Judge and Jury

ll. Sources of American Law and the Federal System
1. The Federal Constitution and the Constitutions of the Several States
2. Federal Statutes
3. State Law
4. Case law as Mandatory or Persuasive Authority
5. Secondary Sources

a) The Restatement of the Law
b) Commercial Publications
c) Online Databases: Westlaw and LexiVNexis

lll. The American System of Checks and Balances
1. The United States Congress and the Legislative Process
2. The United States Supreme Couft
3. The Role of the President of the United States and the Federal Government

lV. Private Law
'1. Gontract Law
2. Torts
3. Property Law
4. Commercial Law
5. Other lmportant Areas of Private Law
6. Notable Differences to Continental Europe

V. CriminalLaw
Vl. Public Law

ViijproceOural Law for Givil Trials
1. CivilTrials in America
2. Other lmportant Differences Compared to Continental Europe

a) Discovery and the Rules of Evidence

t .lonn S. Offi" Prolessor of Law and Director of the C6nt€r for lnternational and Comparatlve Law at
lndiana University School of Law - lndianapolis.

2 Director of th€ Graduate and lnternational Programs at Beniamin N. Cardozo School of Law, Yeshiva
Univershy, New York.



105

b) The Costs of Litigation, the Absence of Fee Shifting, and the Possibility of
Contingency Fees

c) Class Action Law Suits '

Vlll. Legal Education and the Legal Profession
1. From High Schoolto College to Law School
2. The American Bar Association
3. Legal Professionals

lK Finding American Law in Europe
Literature

l. An Overview of Key Differences Between Anglo-American
and Continental European Legal Systems

For the purposes of this first chapter, the American and English (but not "British"
because of differences in Scotland) legal systems can be grouped together be-
cause of their many similarities. On the other hand, the Continental European sys-
tems, in particular the archetypical systems of Germany and France, can be
grouped together because of their respective common features. Alternatively,
one could use the terms comrnon law and civil /aw. This would be a broader ap-
proach, since common law is also applied - at least to an extent - in lreland and
many former British colonies and other Commonwealth countries, such as Austral-
ia, Canada (except Quebec), lndia, Malaysia, New Zealand, etc., while civil law - in
more or less European tradition - can also be found in Latin America, Japan, China,
and various other parts of the world. With respect to the first chapter, both ap-
proaches are good edough because all of the countries in the two groups more
or less share the respective key features. With respect to the later chapters, the
comparisons will focus more nanowly on the American legal system on the one
hand, and the German legal system on the other. That being said, the terminology
common /aw versus civil law is not unproblematic. lndeed, the term common law
largely refers to a historic situation that hardly exists today, and the term civil law is
ambiguous because it is also used to distinguish private law (Zivilrecht)from crim-
inal law and public or administrative law.

1. Case law \lersus Statute Law

One of the best known differences between Continental European law and the An-
glo-American systems is the emphasis on statutes in the one and on cases in the
other. However, it would be a fundamental misconception to think that German,
French, and other Continental European systems rely exclusively or even just much
more on legislation, while the English and the American systems do not have any or
much legislation and are just based on court decisions. From a purely quantitative
point of view it is probably fair to say that today there are almost as many rules
based on case law in German and other Continental legal systems as in the An-
glo-American systems. At th6 same time, the Anglo-American systerns nowadays
probably have almost as many rules in the form of legislation as do the Continental
European systems. The real difference lies, therefore, more in the relevance of sfat-
utes versus the relevance of cases, rather than in their quanttty. This relevance will



106

be discussed in some detail in the next section dealing wlth precedent and the
principle of stare decr'sis.
The distinction between case law and statute law was of much more importance
histortcaily because neither the English nor the Arnerican system at first had stat-
utory legislation in areas such as tort law (unerlaubte Handlungen) or property law
(Sachenrecht). The resolution of disputes in these areas, therefore, required 'ludi-
cially created doctrine" - cas€ law - as the only alternative to denial of justice.
ln areas where there is legislation, by contrast, the relevance of case law ls more by
way of interpretation of the statutes. The same is true of case law interpreting the
U.S. Constitution, which reigns supreme in the U.S.legalsystern. And this is where
Anglo-American and Continental European law become more and more similar in
approach. What German lawyer would claim, for example, to understand the Ger-
man Civil Code (8GB) without the help of the Palandt or other commentarieVcase
law collections? While American lawyers may not resort to commentaries, they are
equally forced to look up case law to understand how statutes are applied in prac-
tice. The same development can also be observed with European Union law and its
interpretation by the European Court of Justice.

2. Precedent and the Principle of Stare Decisis

"Stare decrisis" means "stay with the decision" or "let the [earlier] decision stand."
lndeed, the binding effect of earlier court decisions for subsequent disputes is one
of the defining elements of the Anglo-American or common law systems. Again, the
principle has to be understood in historic context. lt was developed primarily for
areas of law that did not have any statutory rules and, therefore, were based entirely
on case law. ln such areas, for example in torts, the outcome of a dispute would
have been completely unforeseeable and even arbitrary if the judges were not in
some way bound to be consistent with earlier decisions. By contrast, a requirement
that a court normally has to follow earlier decisions adopted by courts of the same
(sometimes) or higher level (always) in the same jurisdiction, provided a high de-
gree of predictability for the parties of a dispute and a safeguard against arbitrary or
biased decisions in a given case, as well as stability, continuity, and judicial econ-
omy for society ln general.
ln the Continental European or civil law systems, on the other hand, such a principle
was not considered necessary given the fact that the outcome of any dispute
should be reasonably predictable on the basis of the applicable legislation. But
of course this does not mean that the Anglo-American judge is slavishly bound
by precedent while the Continental European judges can do with earlier cases
whatever they want. No understanding could be fufther from the truth!
First of all, the Anglo-American systems distinguish between mandatory and merely
persuasive authority. Earlier cases are to be followed only if they were decided by a
court of the same - and even then not always - or a higher level within the same
jurisdiction. Rulings adopted by other courts, r'.e., lower courts or courts in other ju-
risdictions, are merely persuasive. Persuasive authority may be used in subsequent
decisions but it does not have to be used. lt does not have any binding effect.
Second, even if an earlier case was decided by a court of the same or of a higher
level within the same jurisdiction, the earlier decision does not have to be followed if
one or more of the following can be demonstrated: i) the facts are not really the
same, ,.e., the case can be "distinguished on the facts"; ii) the legal issues are



107

not really the same, for exampl€ because a law was changed; iii) the earlier case law
is not consistent, r'.e., some earlier decisions would favor the applicant, others
would favorthe defendant in the present case (although there are rules about more
recent and,/or higher court precedent having higher authority than older and/or
same levelcour.t decisions); iv) the precedent was not well-reasoned.
ln essence, therefore, ev€n a common law court can often escape the principle of
stare decisis by arguing one or more of the following:
- the facts are different
- the law has changed
- times have changed
- the earlier case(s) were decided wrongly, because...
That being said, let us look at precedent in continental European law. The notion
that judges on the Continent can interpret legislation without regard to earlier case
law is clearly enoneous. ln particular, if statutory law is not very detailed and/or
otherwise in need of interpretation to be applied to individual cases, courts and
judges would quickly come under attack and jeopardize their legitimacy if they
adopted their decisions without any regard to earlier decisions in similar casej,
ile., without explaining why they are adopting a different approach. Essentially,
therefore, the continental courts and judges are almost as much pressed to explain
that they do not follow an earlier case because
- the facts are different in the present case
- the law has changed
- times have changed
- the earlier case(s) were decided wrongly, because...
The remaining difference between Anglo-American law, where stare decrbls ap-
plies, and Continental European law, where it does not, is quite small, but impor-
tant: lf a continental European judge does not follow a precedent or the established
case law and does not explain why he or she does not "stay with the decision(s),,,
that alone does not justify/win an appeal.

3. Federal Law, State Law, and the Distribution of Legislative and Judicial
Authority

Fletcher and sheppard, in their book American Law in a Globat context, state that
"American law is basically state law." lndeed, when German lawyers study Arner-
ican law, one of the things that surprises us is the extent to whiah state law con-
tinues to exist in the united states and the extent to which the law may differ from
one state to another. Basically, most of private law (including contracts, torts, prop-
erty law, family law, but also commercial law and corporate law), as well as most of
criminal law, are first and foremost state law. There are, therefore, fifty different stat-
utes and systems of case law for the fifty states, plus the system and jurispru-
,dence for the District of columbia, i.e., the federal capital in washington D.c.,
and yet different systems for territories such as Puerto Rico. By contrast, federal
law is limited to those matters identified in the U.S. Constitution. These are matters
as to which national uniformity is necessary or highly desirable, such as issues of
immigration, intemational relations, war making powers, bankruptcy, and intellec-
tual property rights. This has far reaching consequences for the education and
practice of law. The prestigious law schools all cater to a nationwide population.



108

And there is hardly a textbook or casebook that focuses on the law of only one of
the fifty states. Every school and most books try to deal with ,,the law,' in the
abstraci. To take account of the differences between state laws, legal education
everywhere in America concentrates on fundamental or common principles which
are gleaned from leading cases frorn different states, rather than the German ap-
proach of careful and detailed interpretation of specific statutes with the help of
case law.
The American system of federalism, with limited powers expressly conferred upon
the federal government and all remaining powers resting with the several states,
requires fairly elaborate rules about the sharing of legislative and iudicial authority.
These rules are called "conflicts of law" rules, and rules about "jurisdiction." ln sub-
stance, they are not all that different from what we find in the European Union about
the sharing of legislative and judicial authority between the EU and its Member
States and among the different Member States.
ln the United States, the division of legislative authority between the federal govem-
ment and the state governments is determined by the U.S. Constitution, as inter-
preted by the U.S. Supreme Court. The Constitution itself and any legislation and
judicial decisions properly adopted pursuant to the Constitution are supreme over
any state laws, including the state constitutions.
The division of legislative authority among the several states is largely based on the
tenitoriality principle, Le., each state has authority over what is going on within its
territory regardless of the nationality or home state of the persons involved. The
personality principle is sometimes applied in federal law, which may regulate what
is done by or to Americans outside American territory but it is generally not used as
a basis for state.jurisdiction.
The jurisdiction of the courts of one particular state generally extends to any and all
cases that have a territorial link to that state (with the limited exception of subject
matters reserved for the federal courts, see below). This can easily lead to the
courts of several different states (potentially) having jurisdiction in a given case.
As a consequence, a good attorney may need to analyze a case under different
state laws before deciding where to bring it to court in the best interest of her client.
A judgment properly obtained in the courts of one state will subsequently be rec-
ognized.and enforceable in all other states under the "full faith and credit-clause" of
Article lV of the U.S. Constitution.
Jurisdiction of the federal courts may exist in parallel to jurisdiction of the courts of
one or more states. Generally, the federal courts can be called upon to hear cases
involving
r federal constitutional issues;
r federal statutory issues;
o "diversity cases", r'.e., disputes between residents of different states or between

an American and a foreign national, provided the amount in dispute exceeds
$ 75,000;

o "removal jurisdiction", i.e.,il a case was brought in the courts of a state other
than the home state of the defendant, it can be removed to the federal courts,
provided they also have (parallel) jurisdiction over the matter because it falls
under one of the above categories.



109

A small number of issues is reserued exclusively for the federal courts (e.g., anti-
trust cases, maritime and admiralty cases = Kti'sten- und seerechtliihte str6itigxei-
ten).

4. The Structure of Federal and State Courts

While German courts are divided into civil couns @rdeniliche Gerichte) for private
law and criminal law, administrative courts, labor courts, social security and werfare
courts, as well as tax and finance courts, the U.s. system does not know such spe-
cialization. By contrast, the Arnerican courts system is merely oiviJeo into federal
and state courts. within their respective jurisdiction, most courts and juoges will
hear cases from areas of law as diverse as comrnercial and constitutional law, or
criminal and administrative law. only a few courts on the federal tevltano a tew
more on the state level are specialized for particular subject matters, such as bank-
ruptcy or tax law.
othenrvlse, thare is a hierarchy of courts in the federal system and in most of the
states that is quite similar to the German system, with a three-level structure: the
lowest or first instance courts are fact-finding couds. on the federal level, they are
called "district courts." rn the several states, the name(s) of the first instance courts
differ, often on historic grounds. For example, in New york, the triaicourt ot tirst
instance is 

_cailed "supreme court" (whire the second instance courts are cailed
"Appellate Divisions" and the third instance or highest court in New york state
is called "Court of Appeals")"
Generally, the second instance courts will only hear appeals on grounds of law and
do not review the fact-finding of the first instance courts. on tn! federailever, the
second instance courts are,called "courts of Appeals,,' although tney are often re-
ferred to as "circuit couds" or "Federar circuit courts,,' or wiicn ihere are tg in
total. Again, the names differ in the severalstates.
ln light of the fact that above the federal courts of appeal there is only one federal
supreme court with only nine judges, many of the most important federal decisions
are made at the appellate level and never make it to the U.s. supreme court. To
handle their rather substantial case-load, the federal courts of ipo""r are quite
large, frequently with operations in more than one place, and arwavJwm mudipte
coudrooms (for example, the United states court of Appeals for the Ninth circuit,
which is in charge of cases coming out of carifomia, oregon, wast ington, Arizona,
Montana, ldaho, Nevada, Alaska, and Hawaii, has 4T lloges 

"nJ 
ni. court buil_

dings in four locations - Los Angeles, san Francisco, Fort]and, anJ seattte; hea_
rings are held in additional locations, when necessary).
The federal and state supreme courts only hear appeals from the second instance
courts and usually have a large degree of docket control, ri.e., they can declde
themselves which cases they want to hear and which they do not want to admit
for review. ln the federal system, a writ of certiorari is required for a case to be
reviewed by the U.s. supreme court, and this couft has comptete freedom
whether or not to "grant ceftiorari."



110

The Structure of Federal and State Courts

5. The Adversarial System and the Role of Judge and Jury

ln particular in'criminal law and procedure, a system can be inquisitorial, accusa-

torial, or adversarial. To a lesser extent, this nature of a legal system will also inform

in" pro""Ort"s in administrative and even in civil cases. lnquisitorial systems of
medievaltimes were characterized by a concentration of state powers in the courts

and judges for the purpose of investigating, prosecuting and convicting the sus-

pects. S]nce this concentration of powers creates a structural imbalance of power

in the proceedings - the state with all its resources and police powers on the one

"i4", 
tn" private inaivlOuat on the other - as well as a bias against the suspe6t in the

minds of the judges who have already gathered the evidence and prepared the

prosecution, no democratic state subscribes to an inquisitorialsystem today' ln

an accusatorial system, the functions of investigation and prosecution on the
one nana, and eviluation and adjudication on the other are kept separate' While

the policeand the prosecutorrs otfice puttogetherthe evidence and the charges for

the irial, they have a duty to be objective and to dismiss a case if there is insufiicient

evidence. Tlre iudge comes in as a neutral party who has to weigh the evidence 
for

and against the accused. lf convinced beyond reasonable doubt, the 
judge decides

upon 6uift and punishment. This is the system applied 
in Continental Europe today'

iin"f fV, the adversarial system of the common law countries goes one step further'

Wnif" in" police and thi prosecutor's otfice retain the investigative powers, they
usually need a jury to charge the suspect (a "grand jury" of 23 citizens in the

U.S.federaland most statelystems, who decidd by majority). ln the actualtrial,

the frosecution and the defense have essentially 
equal powers and another iury

ithe'.,petit jury') decides upon guilt or innocence 
(these are a panel of citizens -

i,"r"ff'V twetve - wno have io come to an unanimous verdict). The role of the 
judge

is reduced to a neutral arbiter who has to ensure that the parties observe the rules 
of

tne game anO who, after a guilty verdict, gets to determine the appropriate 
punish-

men't. During the triat, neither the iudge nor the 
jury gets access to the police re-

cords or eve-n any information about a prior criminal record or the like of the defend-

ant. The lury is also prohibited from following any media 
reports about the trial' The

state court ol last reso( State courl of last resort



111

whole idea is to obtain a verdict that is exclusively based on the permissible evi-
dence and not in any way influenced by other factors that may or may not suggest
guilt.

ll. Sources of American Law and the Federal System

1. The Federal Constitution and the Constitutions of the Several States
The Constitution of the United States of America was adopted by the Constitutlonal
convention in1787 and entered intoforce ln 1788 for nine of the now fifty states. lt
is today the oldest and shortest written constitution of any country or govemment in
the world. The Constitution has seven original articles. As early as 1799, ten
'amendments" were added, constituting the Bill of Rights, roughly comparable
to the first '19 articles of the German Basic Law (Grundgesetz). Subsequently, an-
other 17 amendments were added to the Constitution over more than 200 years.
The Eighteenth Amendment, which established the prohibition of alcohol in 191g, is
the only one thatwas ever overturned, which occuned by operation of the twenty-
first amendment.
ln additiontothefederalConstitution, eachof thefiftystateshas itsownconstitution.
All federal and all state laws - including case law - in the United States have to com-
plywith the U.S. Constitution. Andwhile stateconstitutions mayexpand rights gran-
ted to citizens, they cannot take away rights granted by the federal constitution.

2 Federal Statutes
Federal statutory law consists of laws passed by the United States Congress under
the procedures outlined by the U.S. Constitution. This includes passage of a bill by
a rnajority oJ both chambers of Congress. Occasionally, a federal statute can be
blocked from passage by a veto from the President (see Part U1.1. infral. A federal
statute is also subject for review by the federal courts and may be declared un-
constitutional. These are important elements of the separation of powers and
the system of checks and balances under the U.s. constitution, discussed in fur-
ther detail below.

3. State Law

The several states have legislative authority over all matters that are not expllcitly
reseled for federal legislation and those matters that are reserved for the federal
government but have not been fully dealt with by federal laws (yet) so as to preempt
state legislation. Within their proper legislative authority, the states determine them-
selves which matters they want to dealwith on the constitutional level, by legis-
lation, or by administrative regulation.

4. Case law as Mandatory or Persuasive Authority

As described earlier, case law plays an important role both in federal and in state
law. Federal oourts have to respect case law of higher federal courts as mandatory
authority. ln the absence of clear and unambiguous mandatory law, they will also
resort to case law of federal courts of the same or a lower level as persuasive au-
thority and they may look at state court decisions to see whether they can find
useful arguments and/or ways of resolving the dispute before them.



112

Most state courts are not only bound to respect the decisions of higher courts with-
in the same jurisdiction as mandatory authority but also those of other courts of the
same level within the same state. Again, in the absence of clear and unambiguous
mandatory law, they will resoft to any other court decisions (lower courts within the
same state, any state court of any other state, any federal courts) for persuasive
authority.

5. Secondary Sources

a) The Restatement of the Law
As outlined above, in the absence of statutory law, attomeys and judges have to
look to case law for guidance on the resolution of a dispute. lf there is no mandatory
authority or no firm precedent within a given jurisdiction, they have to look for per-
suasive authority from other jurisdictions. Thus, in an area governed by state law, if
there is no clear and established case law for a certain type of dispute, attorneys
and judges may have to look at a multitude of other states and the way they may
have resolved the issue.
As early as the 1920s, it was felt that areas such as contracts, property, or torts,
where there was little or no statutory law, had become cumbersome to deal with
and sometimes yielded arbitrary or contradictory results because of the large num-
ber of judgments from different states with slightly different rules and approaches
to similar or identical questions. With this in mind, the American Law lnstitute was
created in 1923 inter alia to support the "clarification and simplification of the law'
(for more information go to http://www.ali.org).
The primary activity of the ALI lies in "the restatement of basic legal subjects that
would telljudges and lawyers what the law was." The lnstitute charged well-known
law professors, judges, and practitioners - "reporters" - to develop authoritative
overviews of the case law related to ceftain areas of the law. The drafts submitted
by the reporters were then debated and approved by the Council of the ALI and its
members. ln this way, between 1923 and 1 944, Restatements of the Law - remotely
comparable to the commentaries in German law - were developed for agency,
conflicts of laws (determining jurisdiction in multi-state cases), contracts, judg-
ments, propsrty, restitution, security, torts, and trusts. Almost immediately after
these were finished, the lnstitute started new editions, called Restatement Second,
as well as restatements for additional areas of law. As of today, additional restate-
ments are available for landlord and tenant law, foreign relations law of the United
States, unfair competition, property (modgages and servitudes), suretyships and
guarantee, torts (product liability and apportionment of liability), as well as the law
governing lawyers. Further topics, such as property (wills and other donative trans-
fers), restitution and uniust enrichment, and trusts, are being developed.

b) Commercial Publications
Commercial publications are generally similar to those in Germany and other Eu-
ropean countries. There are academic publications like treatises, textbooks, case:
books, and legal periodicals; there are dictionaries and encyclopedias of legal
terms and issues; and of course there is a rapidly growing number of sources
on the internet. Three differences to the situation in Europe shall be mentioned
briefly. First, the significance of casebooks for law school teaching and for legal
research is far greater than in Germany, which follows logically from the greater



113

reliance on case law. Second, and by contrast to the first observation, article-by-
article commentaries of statutory law (such as the Palandf for the 8GB), are virtually
unknown. Finally, the number and quality of legal periodicals is much higher than
what we find in Europe. While we find not much more than half a dozen high quality

legal periodicals ln Germany that rnore or less everyone should be aware of, the
number of such publications in the United States certainly exceeds one hundred.

c) Online Databases: Westlaw and Lexis/Nexis
The most prominent of the online databases for U.S.law are Lexis and Westlaw.
Both of these databases are fee-based. For years, they have been offered free of
charge to law students and professors at U.S. law schools, a trend that we now also

see at some EuroPean law schools.
Lexis and Westlaw each offer slightly different materials, but they both offer access
to a wide range of domestic and international legal and extralegal materials. The
domestlc materials include allfederaland state cases;allfederaland state legis-
lative materials (including pending legislation and legislative history);executiv€ and
administrative materials at the state and federal level; law reviews, treatises, and
other texts, organized by title and also by topical practice area; dictionaries, direc-
tories, and Other reference sources; general and legal news; and a range of other

information. A great attribute of these services is the ability to search directories for
specific words or phrases.

lll. The American System of Checks and Balances

The American system of separation of powers (Gewaltenteilung) and checks and
balances (wechse/seitrge Kontrolle\, as contained in the federal Constitution, was
inspired by the writings of Montesquieu.

1. The United States Congress and the Legislative Process

The United States Congress consists of two chambers: the House of Representa-
tives, sometimes referred to as the lower house, and the Senate, sometimes refer-
red to as the upper house. The Senate consists of 100 members, two from each of
the fifty states. By having an equal representation from each state, the Senate pro-

tects in particular the interests of the smaller states. Senators are elected for terms
of six years, with one third coming up for (re-)election every two years. By contrast,

the House has 435 members who represent congressional districts of roughly
equal population. That means that states with large populations send more repre-

sentatives to Washington than states with small populations (Califomia, the state

with the largest population, has 52 Representatives, while Alaska, Delaware, Mon-
tana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Vermont, and Wyoming have only one each).
The congressional districts are redrawn every ten years to take account of popu-

lation developments and to keep them as nearly equal in representation as pos-
sible. All representatives are elected for terms of two years.
Proposals for federal legislation can be introduced in the form of a "bill" in either
house by any one of its respective members. Depending on the substance matter
,of a bill, it is then referred to one of the standing committees for detailed discussion.
House and Senate committees, in tum, often refer the matter to a sub-committee.



114

The committee or sub-committee may receive input from lntemal and extemal ex-
perts in writing or ln public hearings and it may be assisted by the Office of Legis-
lative Counsel of the respective chamber ln the drafting of the actual legislation. At
the end of the procedure, the committee votes on the proposal and decides on one
of three possible outcomes: the bill may be reported favorably and sent to the entire
chamber for adoption, together with explanations about its legislatlve history cost,
purpose, etc; alternatively, a blll may be defeated in committee; finally, it may be
"tabled", Le., postponed until further,notice. The last-mentioned outcome is prob-
ably the most frequent.
lf a bill is approved by the respective committee of one house of Congress, it is then
brought before that entire chamber (r'to the floor"). At this stage, further discussion
may ensue and amendments may be made. Eventually, the chamberwill vote on the
proposaland if thebillissupported bya majority, itgoestotheotherhouseforasimilar
procedure, from scrutiny bytherespectivecommittee(s) to avoteonthefloor. Similar
or identical bills may and often do proceed through both chambers simultaneously.
lf both housespassanidenticalbillbymajorityvote, itgoesstraighttothe Presidentto
besigned intolaw. Thebillbecomes lawif signed bythe Presidentwithinten daysor, if
the President does nothing, the bill becomes law automatically after ten days when
Congress is in session. However, if the President vetoes the bill, it is sent backto Con-
gresswith an explanation oftheveto. ln suchacase, the billdies, unlessthe presiden-
tial veto is ovenidden by a two-thirds majority vote in both houses of Congress.

lf the two houses of Congress adopt different versions of the same bill, a confer-
ence committee has to look at the drafts and try to develop a mutually acceptable
compromise. This committee consists of members of both houses. lf they are suc-
cessful, the bill goes back for another vote on the floor of each house and if now
accepted in identicalform by majority of both houses, it can then proceed to the
President for signature (or veto).

2 The United States Supreme Court

The United States Supreme Court is the highest court in the United States and has
the final word in interpreting issues of federal constitutional and statutory law. The
Supreme Court has nine members - the Chief Justice of the United States and eight
Associate Justices. The Court sits en banc, unless a particular member is not avail-
able, or recuses him or herself, for exarnple, to avoid conflicts of interest.
Except for a very small area of original jurisdiction and mandatory appellate jurisdic-
tion, the Supreme Court's docket is entirely discretionary which means that the
Court decides which of the cases presented for its review it will hear. Under the
so-called "rule of four," a case presented on a petition for a writ ol certiorari will
be heard by the Court if four of the nine justices vote to hear it. The decision whether
tograntthewrftof certiorart ismadeprivatelybytheJustices, and noreasonneedbe
given by the Court for the denial of the writ. The Supreme Coud reviews only about 90
cases each year of the several thousands that are presented to it for its review.
The Supreme Court plays an important role with regard to checks and balances vis-
A-vis the other branches of the federal government. A critical power of the Supreme
Court - and all other federal courts - is the right of judicial revl€w, under which the
Court can review actions of the Congress and the executive for consistency with
the law, including the U.S. Constitution.



115

& The Role of the President of the Unlted States and the Federal Govemment

The President of the United States is the chief executive officer of the United States.
.His duties, as outlined ln the Constitution, are to be Commander in Chief;to make
treaties, with the advice and consent of the Senate; and to nominate and, with the
advice and consent of the Senate, appoint public ministers, consuls, ambassadors,
and all federal court judges. The President is elected for a term of four years, and he
miy run for re-election, but not beyond one second term.
Once elected, the President selects a cabinet. Each member of the cabinet is the
head of a department in the executive branch. Cabinet members include th6 Sec-
,retary of State (Aussenminister), the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the
Treasury, and the Attorney General (roughly Jusfi2mrntlster). ln addition to these de-
partments, the executive branch of the federal government includes a wide range
of so-called "independent agencies." These agencies are headed by collegial bo-
dies and supported by a large staff, most of whom are civil service employees and
whose employment does not vary with the curent administration.
The administration, writ large, has the job of executing or enforcing federal law as
seldown by Congress. Thls is accomplished primarilythrough rulemaking, investi-
gation, and enforcement activities.

tV. Private Law

'Private law ls state law in the United States, rather than federal law. Therefore, the
following remarks must be taken with some caution as some differences, often
substantial ones, can be found from one state to another.

1. Contract Law

The Restatement (Second) defines a contract as a promise, for the breach of which
the law provides a remedy. With few exceptions, American law will not enforce con-
tracts unless they are evidenced by some written document, which does not have
to be the contract itself. Another difference to Continental European law is the re-
quiiement of "consideration." Simply stated, American law will not enforce a prom-
ise unless some kind of consideration was agreed upon in return. ln most cases,
this is not a problem since the vast majority of contracts require payment in return
foi good or seruices. However, one kind of promise continues to create problems to
this day, namely the irrevocable offer. lf one pafty to an agreement promises not to
revoke an offer but does not get anything for this promise, it is generally not en-
forceable. One way of circumventing the problem is to pay a nominalsum - one
dollar-forthe inevocable offer. The Uniform CommercialCode (UCC)providesthe
option of making an offer inevocable by putting it down in writing. Courts have
ioccasionally enforced an offer merely on the ground that the other side relied
on it and made investments of time and money.

2. Torts

Similar to the German system ol "unerlaubte Handlung" ($ 823 8GB), U.S. law rec-
ognizes claims for compensation in cases where a wrong was done by one person
to another outside of a contractual relationship. Generally, such claims require that
the wrong was done intentionally (absichfiich), negligently (fahddssrg), or in the con-



116

text of a high risk activity where any kind of damage may have to be compensated,
even in the absence of any negligence. The tatter case is called "strict liability" or
"no-fault liability" in the U.S. (Gefilhrdungshaftung\, while the former two are based
on fault. The standard, whether or not a person acted negligently, is based on what
areasonable person would have done in the circumstances. This question, in turn,
is generally decided by a jury of lay persons, who also determine which elements of
damage should be compensated and by how much. The fact that many juries have
tended to favor the individual over large corporations or insurance companies,
combined with the fact that damages can be awarded not only for property dam-
age and medical expenses but also for pain and suffering, explains the occasional
judgment that makes headlines as far away as Europe, when very large sums of
money are awarded for seemingly strange incidents (for example, when a plaintiff
was awarded $ 160,000 in damages plus $ 2.7 million in punitive damages after she
bought coffee at a drive-thru McDonalds, put the cup between her legs, opened it
while driving to add sugar and milk, spilled the coffee, and burned herself, see Lie-
beck v. McDonald's Restaurants, No. CV-93-O2419 - N.M. Dist. Aug. 18, 1994).
While the U.S. system tends to award higher sums for comparable torts than, for
example, the German system, and some of these awards are genuinely unreason-
able, the U.S. system does have a number of strengths. ln combination with certain
features of procedural law, most notably, the American system provides access to
court even for persons who cannot afford to hire a lawyer and take their case to
court. These features will be discussed beloq in the context of procedural law in
civiltrials.

3. Property Law

Private property has a special significance for Americans. The Fifth Amendment to
the Constitution, part of the Bill of Rights, stipulates the trilogy of "life, liberty, [and]
property" that are the core freedoms in this country. Deprivations of property, in
particular real property, rnust not occur "without due process of law" and - if prop-
efty has to be taken for public use - there must be "just compensation." This differs
significantly from the treatment of property in the German Grundgesea and other
European constitutions that often emphasize that property entails obligations (So-
zialbindung).
This background needs to be kept in mind for any analysis of American property law
cases. Land owners can first of all object to the "taking" of their land, Le., the ex-
propriation, whether by the federal govemment or any state or local authority. They
also have remedies against trespassers, Le., unauthorized entrants, as well as nui-
sances originating from neighboring properties. One issue that remains hotly con-
tested is the question when a public regulation of land us€, for example in the form
of zoning regulations (Bauplanungsrecht) or environmental regulations; has such a
serious impact on a property that it constitutes a "taking" in the sense of the Fifth
Amendment and, therefore, must be compensated.

4. Commercial Law

The federal legislature does not have broad powers over commercial law. lt is
merely entitled to regulate "interstate commerce", Le., commercial transactions
that extend beyond the borders of one state. Theoretically, this power could be



117

broadly construed. For example, in Ka?enbach v. Mcclung, the supreme court
held that the federal govemment could intervene to eliminaie racid dlscrimination
by a restaurant owner in Alabama on the basis of the interstate commerce clause.
By refusing to serve African Americans, the owner reduced his customer base, 1..e.
the amount of food he sold, and consequently the amount of food he had to buy.
Since at least some of the food purchased for the restaurant was from out of stat€,
the refusal to serve African Americans had an impact on interstate commerce,
which in turn subjected the matter to federal regulation. ln practice, however,
the federal government has been hesitant to maki use of this power in the area
of private law. By and large, commercial law, therefore, belongs to the legislative
powers of the several states.
Significant differences between the laws of different states in matters such as sale
or lease of goods, or secured commercial transactions, would be a burden for pri_
vate enterprise, however. Therefore, the National conference of commissioners on
uniform state Laws (see http://www.nccusl.org) started as early as 1g96 to draft
model laws for the adoption by all states. Various model laws were drawn together
after world war ll into a comprehensive piece of model legislation, the uniform
commercial code (UCC). sincethe end of the 1g60s, almost ail states have adopt-
ed commerciallaws based substantially on the UCC and this has reduced ditferen-
ces enormously.
some problems do remain. First, not all states have adopted all parts of the UCC
and some have adopted it with significant changes. Second, il.re UCc is under_
going a process of updating and revision and it willtake time for all sections of
the model code to be revised and then for all states to adopt revised laws on
its basis. Third, not all areas of commercial law are covered by tire UCC. For exam-
ple, insurance law, as well as corporations and paftnerships have not been in-
cluded by the NCCUSL; bankruptcy berongs to the federar powers.

5. Other lmportant Areas of private Law

Family law, as well as trusts and estates (Erbrecht), are also areas of state lagis_
lative powers. Federal law impacts state law in two ways: Federal constitutional
law, in particularvia the Bill of Rights, is blnding upon the state legislatures, courts,
and administrations. Furthermore, federal powers of taxation and-social welfare are
of practical relevance in many family or estate cases.

6. Notable Differences to Continental Europe

Thefirstthing that comesto mind when analyzing differences between German and
American private law is the absence of any general statutory provisions. There is
neither an equivalent to the "Nlgemeiner Teil" of the German bivil cooe (SS1 - 240
8GB), nor to its "schu/drecht Altgemeiner Teil" (gs24l - 4g2 BGBI. However, the
general principles that have been developed - largely by case law -on issues such
as capacity of the parties of a contract, form requirements, offer and acceptance,
interpretation, voidability for mistake and other reasons, performance, non-per_
formance, agency and assignment of rights, as well as remedies, by and large ap-
ply across the board for all types of contracts. Nevertheless, the practicat imfact of
the lack of general legislation can be found in much longer and more detailed con_
tracts. Typically, contracts drawn up byAmerican attorneys run into several dozens



118

of pages, even if the undedying transaction seems quite straightforurrard, and in-
clude obligations that would seem perfectly obvious to a German lawyer, for ex-
ample that each side should be honest and should not violate the principle of good
faith. Naturally, American attorneys have allthe standard clauses pre-formulated
on their computer harddisks and just copy-paste the relevant provisions into each
new contract. unfortunately, however, these so-called "boilerplate" terms do not
always fit and the lengthy documents alltoo often are not very carefully read. The
effortto avoid any kind of ambiguities at dllcost by having highty detailed provisions
in the contract is,then turned on its head and ambiguous or contradictory terms can
be imported involuntarily.
other surprising features of American law will be discussed below, when the stan-
dard civiltrial is described in some detailthrough its various stages.

V. Criminal Law

The common origins of English and Amerlcan criminal law lie in case law. Nowa-
days, at least in pad because of the principle nullum cimen sine lege, nulla poena
sine lege, criminal law is statute law. ln the United States, criminal law is also largely
state law and while most of the major crimes - felonies - are quite similarly defined
from one state to the other, the laws about minor crimes - misdemeanors - and
petty offenses can differ considerably. Notable differences between the states will
also be found with respect to the punishments prescribed for the different crimes.
some states quickly resort to jail sentences while others prefer fines, probation,
and other sanctions for less serious crimes. A bit more than half the states -
and this number is growing again in recent times - provides for the death penalty
for the most serious crimes. A certain degree of harmonization between different
state laws, in particular with regard to general principles of criminal law on issues
such as culpability, causation, justification, and responsibility, has been achieved
with the help of the Model Penal code, developed under the auspices of the Amer-
ican Law lnstitute.
Federal powers exist for interstate crimes, such as drug trafficking across state
borders, and for crimes committed on federal property. These powers also cover
national security concerns and are of particular importance with the cunent expan-
sion of laws against terrorism.

Vl. Public Law

Pubtic law in the United states can be divided into two important parts. First, the
procedural law governing the adoption of rules or decisions by govemment agen-
cies if these may affect private individuals or private bodies, as well as their review
by the courts. second, the substantive law adopted by a multitude of administra-
tive agencies. Both parts can be found at the federal level and also at the level of the
several states.
Federal administrative agencies, such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
are governed in their work by the federal constitution, as well as the FederalAd-
ministrative Procedure Act (FAPA) and other federal laws. Chief among the guiding
principles of administrative procedures is the due process clause of the constitu-
tion. lt is elaborated by federal laws and by case law and guarantees a wide range
of procedural safeguards. Judicial review is often directly before the federal appel-



119

late courts and standing usually requires direct concern and exhaustion of all ad-
ministrative remedies.

Vll. Procedural Law for Givil Trials

1. Civil Thials in America

Civiltrials in state and federalcourts are governed by a multitude of different rules
and regulations. This includes rules derlved from principles established by the
U.S. Constitution and state constitutions, as well as legislation, case law, and court
rules on the federal and/or state level. Finally, there are rules of professional ethics
and conduct by the bar associations at the national, state, and local level. For civil
trials, the most important provisions are found in the rules of civil procedure and in
the rules of evidence. ln matters golng before state courts, these rules may differ
from one state to another.

Fletcher and Sheppard break down the different elements of a civil trial in chrono-
logical order as follows:
i) initialinvestigation
ii) drafting and service of pleadings
iii) preliminarymotions
iv) discovery
v) summary motions
vi) pretrialconference
vii) jury selection
viii) trial
ix) jury instruction
x) verdict and judgment
xi) post-trial motions
xii) appeal
xiii) execution

Itwould be beyond the scope of this paperto describe each step in detail. However,
some remaks about the less obvious elements shall be made.
The lnitialinvestigation is more impoitant in Americathan in Germany. ln addition to
the issues every lawyer has to investigate, such as the facts of the case and the
laws applicable to it, American lawyers frequently have to think about issues of
jqrisdiction. lf a case could be brought in more than one state, or in either federal
or state court, they essentially have to analyze it under all possible systems that
could apply in order to determine where the case should be brought in the best
interest of their client.
The pleadings submitted to court and served upon the defendant are similar to their
German counterparts. They have to deal with the facts, the applicable law, and the
remedy sought, and they also have to elaborate on Jurisdiction. By contrast to the
German system, service has to be effected by the plaintiff, rather than the court.
The defendant usually has twenty days - at least in federal court - to respond with
one or more of the following: a motion to dismiss the claim; a substantive answer,
also called aflirmative defense; and/or a counterclaim. lf the defendant does not
answer within twenty days, the plaintiff can ask for a default judgme nl{Versdumnis-
ufteit).



120

Preliminary motions can take severar forms. rn particurar, the defendant may moveto have the case dismissed for rack of jurisdiciion 
"itnl ,".p"tiiul "oun, 

or be_cause the craim was not properry served upon trim or trer-tn stIJ" 
"-""", 

the prain_tiff can object and severar exchanges of written preadings anJ 
"""n "i""ring 

aboutthese preriminary points may foilow. other motion" *"v""""r1Jili,;i" issues or tohave a compraint defi.ned more crearly. The praintiff may move for an attachmentorder securing or seizing property, forin injunction p.r,'ir:iiinJ;; activires, orfor a restraining order.
Discovery is the procedure under which each side of the dispute can demand evi-dence from the other pursuant to certain rures. This pro""J*", Iio some or tneprobtems connected with it, wit be described rn 

"orn"*n"i Jrl"i"io","ir berow.After the facts of the case have been estabrished, eitner appiiciniii-oetenoant maysubmit a motion for summary judgment for all or part of a dispute, if the entire caseor certain parts of a crairn can be decided on the basis 
"f 

,;Ji;il;iacts or on thebasis of facts that are not sutficienfly provabre to ailow tre maleito fo to a jury. rnthat case, the court can proceed by deciding no." p"ri" o;il;il; case pureryon the basis of the appricabre raw, without ariactuaririar, i.e., *itloui n"arings andfurther exchange of arguments.
lf summary iudgment is not granted, the next step is a pretriar conference b€tweenthe attorneys and the judge. rn this meeting, the parties ;k t;;;brish to whatextent there is agreement about the facts oi the case, admissible evidence for theestabrishment of disputed facts, evidence to be excruded trom f,elriar, appricabreand relevant legal arguments, etc. The outcome of the conferen"" i" 

" 
pr"trial orderthat ouuines the evidence to be presented in triar. D"p"il;;;;iiJ prisoiction,

earlier pre-trial conferences may have been convened.
Although the parties may agree to have a triar by the judge arone, the majority of civirtriats are stiil by jury. Traditionaily, juries consist ot twjve ,;";;;;;"rected citi_zens. civir trials can arso be before juries of six. The 

="r""tion ot'iil j-rro^ beginswith the summoning of a.fairry.rarge number of peopre to appear in court at a certaintime and date. Jury duty is obrigaiory and fairure to appear is pun,rn"ur" ivi"*'ir.,"members of the group are then examined, r.e., question"a dv tr" FJgL and/or theattorneys about their views on the rerevant issues. Next, tre iuogJ 
""il"t. 

suitabrejurors and the attorneys get a chance to challenge 11.re serectiois fo-r cause, it theparticular juror s6ems unsuitable, for example be6ause of u p"oon"riiterest in ttrecase. Each side arso has.a smail numberof peremptory chailenges, ie., canoioatesthat can be excluded without specific reasons.
with the jury in prace, the triar can begin. rt consists of four main parts: the openingstatements of both sides,.presentation oJ praintiff's eviaencq'pieleiiation or o"-fendant's evidence, and crosing argumenti of both sides. As r,". u""n .ir:tJJ""r-lier, att four phases of the triar aie rargery controiled ov tn" ,""J""iiiJlttorn"y. 

"nothe 
judge is mainly making sure that the appticabte pro"eour"i"nJ eiril"ntiary rutesare observed.

After the crosir{g arguments.have been presented, the judge instructs the jury howthey have to deliberate, what the plaintiff had to prove to win and what the defendanthad to prove for any countercraims, and the rever or certaintv reqrirJ. in" instruc_tions are drafted by the attorneys for the judge ano eitner sii";;;j;;i'#H;
parts or formurations before the instructions Jre read to ti," l"rv. T,.'" r",i ias to cometo an unanimousverdictonthequestionsgiventoit, fore*ampre, wn-Jtnlitn"o"r"no-



121

ant has to compensats the plaintiff for his or her damages and by how much. ln a
criminal trial, the jury decidesthe question of guilt butdoes not prescribethe punish-
ment in the event of a conviction, with one important exception: only a lury can re-
commend a sentence of death in those jurisdictions in which it is permitted.
After the actual trial is over, three things can still happen. First, the losing party may
submit post-trial motions, ln particular a motion for judgment nov (non obstante
veridicto), that is for setting aside the jury's verdict as unreasonable, or a motion
for a new trial, for example if evidence was concealed by one party, or if there was a
mistake made during the trial. Second, the losing party may appeal the judgment to
the court of second instance. Finally, if the judgment becomes enforceable, the
winnlng party may need a writ of execution, i.e,, an additional court order, if the
losing pafty does not pay or otherwise perform voluntarily.

2 Other lmportant Differences Compared to Continental Europe
a) Discovery and the Rules of Evidence
As mentioned above, discovery is one of the phases of preparation for a trial. Dur-
ing this phase, the attorneys for applicant and defendant exchange demands for
certain documents or other forms of evidence in order to fully understand the fac-
tual and legal position of the other side. specifically, discovery can take the follow-
ing forms: i) written questions ("intenogatories') to be answered in writing; ii) re-
quests for documents or tangible evidence; iii) questioning of witnesses by the re-
spective attorneys ("depositions"); iv) requests for other evidence, such as medical
records or examinations, inspection of localities, etc.
From a European perspective, the fascinating issues with discovery are twofold.
First, the judge takes a very passive role, at best. The court only oversees that
the rules are being respected. The judge neither pafiiclpates in the questioning
of witnesses nor in the search of other evidence. Whether or not available evidence
will be found depends largely on the skills of the attomeys.
Second, the scope of the procedure as such can be astounding. Although requests
for documents or questions for witnesses have to be relatively specific, they can be
as wide as, for example, "all minutes, protocols, and other documents related to
the takeover negotiations between companies X and Y during the years 2003 and
2004." The fact that such requests will be backed up by court orders if necessary
and that the withholding of evidence will be sanctioned, contributes to two forms of
abuse of the procedure. On the one hand, sometimes claims are brought to court
based on fairly weak claims mainly in order to obtain vast amounts of useful and/or
confidential information from the other side. This phenomenon is sometimes called
a "fishing expedition." On the other hand, defendants sometimes respond to broad
requests for information with truckloads of documents that are only marginally rel-
evant to the dispute in order to distract the applicants from problematic evidence
that may be buried in the mountains of files. Or defendants may respond to broad
requests by inviting plaintiff's attorneys to review documents at their.corporate of-
fices, with the same purpose.
ln spite of the occasional abuse, the discovery procedure is very dear to the heart of
American lawyers and any lawsuit where these means are not available to them -
such as litigation in Europe - is inherently suspect. European courts and lawyers, by
contrast, have great reservations against discovery orders from American plaintiffs
and frequently refuse to lend a hand in what they consider the extraction of confi-



122

dential business data. This may go so far that some European countries, including
the tJnited Kingdom and Switzerland, forexample, have adopted blocking stahrtes
or laws that prohibit persons and companies undertheir jurisdiction from providing
certain kinds of documents or information in response to American extratenitorial
discovery.
lnternationally, the matter of discovery is govemed by the Hague Convention on the
Taking of Evidence Abroad in Civil or Commercial Matters of 't 8 March 1970 (http://
hcch.e-vision.nl/index-en.php?act=conventions.text&cid=82), yvhich is based on
voluntary collaboration, Le., more the Continental European approach. Negotia-
tions on a Preliminary Draft Convention on Jurisdiction and Foreign Judgments
in Civil and Commercial Matters, which would essentially extend the Lugano Con-
vention andlor Brussels I Regulation (Regulation 4412001) to the United States and
other interested non-European countries, are stuck precisely because of disagree-
ment on issues related to discovery and admissible evidence.

b) The Costs of Litigation, the Absence of Fee Shifting, and the Possibility of
Contingency Fees

While it is customary in the United States to oblige the losing party to pay the rel-
atively modest court fees, including the expenses for the jury, each side normally
has to pay his or her attorney's fees regardless of the outcome of the case. This
absence of fee shifting has important consequences. Since the court fees are in-
dependent of the amount of money requested or received, and each side has to
pay his or her own attorney's fees anyway, there is no disincentive against demand-
ing outrageously large sums of money. To give a practical example: lf a person is
injured in an accident at work and, as a consequence, permanently confined to a
wheelchair, a German attorney will seek one million Euro in compensation from the
employer if precedent indicates that this seems to be the obtainable amount forthis
kind of inlury. Should the German attorney seek 100 million Euro instead and still get
1 million Euro, she would have lost 99 Yo ol the claim and the plaintiff would be
required to pay all of the court fees and all of the regular attorney's fees of both
sides. ln the end, because the fees increase with the amount in dispute, the costs
of the proceedings would exceed the 1 million Euro award.
By contrast, no such thing can happen in America. Even if precedent would indicate
that the likely compensation for the injury will be around 1 million dollars, plaintiff's
counsel is likely to seek 100 million dollars in compensation. Even if only 1 million
dollars is awarded by the jury the court fees would be entirely placed on the losing
employer and the attorney's fees would be borne by each side separately. And
these fees would not be tied in any way to the amount of the initial claim.
Furthermore, the plaintitf may have entered into a contingency fee anangement with
his or her lawyer. Undersuch an agreement, the lawyer receives a cedain percentage
(usually between 20 and 40 %, depending on the amount of work and the amount of
moneyinvolved)of whatever sum of moneyshe can obtain for herclient. lmportantly,
the lawyer gets nothing if the client loses and the lawyer may even be stuck with the
court fees. Thus, the litigation can become virtually risk-free for the client.
The possibility of contingency fees is important for attorneys, who can make a lot of
moneyif theycanwin large,awardsfortheirclients. ln ourexample, if the juryshould
return an award of 10 million dollars forthe disabled plaintiff, the lawyer might get as
much as 4 million dollars. However, the contingency fee system also has benefits



123

for the clients, ln particular if they do not have enough money to hire experienced
and/or well-known attomeys and pay their court fees, etc., up front.

c) Class Action Law Suits
ln situations where a larger number of people have the same kind of clalm against
bne and the same defendant, U.S.federal law and many of the states offer an in-
teresting procedural construct in the form of a c/ass action.ln these cases, the en-
tire "class"- including people who have no knowledge of the trial - can be repre-
sented by a small number of plaintiffs or even a single plaintiff, and any compen-
sation obtained from the defendant will be shared amongst all known members of
the class.
The usefulness of this device can again be illustrated with an example. lf a large
corporation violated contractual or other obligations owed to its clients, the indi-
vidual damage for each client might be small, maybe under $1,000. The corre-
sponding and illicit gain for the company, who may have hundreds of thousands
of clients, can nevertheless exceed a billion dollars. Under German law, it would be
unlikely that any of the clients would take on this large company and try to recover
his or her damages. The amount at issue would not be worth it and the client would
be intimidated by the superior resources and well-known legal counsel available to
the corporation. ln the United States, by contrast, a law firm could put together a
class action and take the case on a contingency fee basis.
Before a class action will be "ceftified," the plaintiffs have to show i) that the group
of potential applicants is so large that it is not possible or at least not practicable to
deal with each case individually; ii) that there are similar or identical questions of
fact and law at issue in each case; iii) the representing plaintiff's case is a typical
case; and iv)that the interests of each member of the class will be adequately rep-
resented. After a class has been certified, the defendant's attorneys will make good
faith efforts at notifying every member of the class - which may include public an-
nouncements in the newspapers. The members of the class then have a short
deadline to "opt out" of the class action if they do not want to be involved. Every
person who does not opt out - either because he or she wants to participate or
because they never heard of the case - is considered in the class. As a conse-
quence, the resufting settlement or judgment will have the force ol res iudicata
(Rechtskraft) for them and they participate in any financial benefits - after the at-
tomeys pay the couft fees and take their contingency fees, of course.
The procedure has benefits for both sides. lt not only permits large numbers of
inexperienced people with limited financialresources to pursue their rights against
large and wellfunded corporations, it also allows corporate defendants to settle the
case against them once and for all with the force of res iudicafa for and against
pretty much any potential plaintiff. Last but not least, there is also a benefit for so-
ciety because the possibility of a class action law suit can be a pretty strong dis-
incentive for corporate misbehavior to the detriment of consumers.

Vlll. Legal Education and the Legal Profession

1. From High Schoolto College to Law School

The American school and university system is fundamentally different from the sys-
tem in Germany. This difference will be somewhat reduced with the implementation



124

of the so-called Bologna reforms, r'.e., the introduction of bachelor and master de-
grees in the EU Member States, including Germany. However, some important dif-
ferences remain.
School children are segregated at an early age in Germany, usually after four years
of elementary school. Those who are more academically inclined - or who simply
had the highest grades - continue after grade 4 in high school (Gymnasium). Those
who are more practically inclined go to vocational school (Pea/schu/e). And those
who are at the lowest end of the grade spectrum and unable to pass the admission
tests eitherfor high school or for vocational school, essentially remain in elementary
school, although it is now called middle school (Mittelschule). All this happens
around the age of 9 or 10 and has far reaching consequences for future opportu-
nities, since in pdndfle only graduates of high school are admitted to higher edu-
cation at universities and universities of applied science (Fachhochschulenl. At
course, there are some exceptions and some children manage to switch tracks
or to obtain a high school diploma ((Fach)Abitur) after going to vocatlonal school,
but the basio distinction remains true for the large majority of students.
Since all law schools in Germany are at university level, only those 30 or so per cent
of children who graduate from high school are even eligible to pursue studies in.law.
On the other hand, the law schools - with one exception - are all public and do not
have the right to administer their own admission tests. ln effect, pretty much any
high schoolgraduate who is so inclined can study law in Germany and this is usual-
ly done right after high school. Until a few years ago, law school effectively took five
years, generating graduates with an average age of around 24.The average dura-
tion of law school has effectively been reduced to four years recently and, therefore,
graduates are even younger these days.
During law school, German students do not face very many and very difficult
exams. While there are significant differences from one federal state to the next,
the main examinations are at the end of the entire study program and cover every-
thing that should have been taught during those four years. With average failing
rates in the magnitude of SOVo and a limit of only one second attempt, the final
law school exams (Erstes Staatsexarnen) are daunting for most students, who tend
to spend the final year or even two years of their law studies in intensive preparation
for the final exams, often with the help of private tutors (Fepetitorien).
Once graduated from law school, most students continue their education with a
cycle of intemships in the public administration, courts, and private law firms. ln
parallel, they receive training in areas such as drafting of legal briefs and judgments.

Furthermore, the students, who are now called "Referendare" usually take prepar-

atory classes for the bar exam (Zweites Staatsexarnen).'After about two years of
rotating intemships, the students finally take the bar exam and - if successful- are
now considered fully qualified for any legal profession, including practice as attor-
neys, prosecutors, or judges.
The American system differs from the grgund up. All children are generally entitled
to proceed from elementary school (4 years) to middle school (4 years) and on to
high school (another 4 years). Although there are always some students who drop
out of the system and fail to graduate, the large majority of American students ob-
tains a high school diploma after lwelve years of schooling. Those 40-45 o/o who
want to pursue higher education then apply to one of more than 1,000 American
colleges or universities to study for a bachelor degree. This is usually another study



125

program of four yqars and can be divided in two years of more general studies
(somewhat cornparable to the final two years of '|3-year high school programs
in Bavaria or Baden-whrttembergl and two years of specialized or profeslional
studies. The students usually have a choice of a number of different subjects
for the last two years of college, such as liberal arts, education, political science,
physics, etc. only a few colleges offer a specialization in law, whiih is then called a
pre-law program because it does not provide a law degree but only a preparation
for law school. The majority of Americans do not pursu€ higher educaiion'beyond
the bachelor level.
,Those who want to go into law, however, apply to one or several of the approxi-
mately 190 law schools that are accredited by the American Bar Association and
thus able to confer the degree - called Junb Doctor (J.D.)- that entiges its bearer to
take a state bar exam and, if successful, to practice as attorneys. Most law pro-
grams are three-year programs and extremely demanding. students take an aver-
age of 15 credits per semester for a total of 90 credits for graduation. One credlt is
equivalent to one hour of in-class time every week over a term of 14 or 15 weeks. ln
addition to some 15 hours per week in the classroom, students have to prepare
enornous reading assignments, dozens of cases, and other projects every week.
ln class attendance is required and students are regularly called upon to demon-
strate their understanding of the cases and materials under discussion. professors
have not only name lists but seating charts with pictures and keep track of the per-
formance of each and every student. During and at the end of each course, there
are written exams and students obtain onlf credit for courses successfully com-
pleted. By contrast, at the end of the three-year law program, there are no final
exams and no final theses requirements. There is, of course, the bar exam...
while both the German (and continental European) system(s) and the American
system of (higher) education have obvious strengths and weaknesses, there
are three important features in the American system that make it superior, at least
in our view:
1) children are not segregated at the early age of 9 or 10;
2) the colleges provide a broader education at high level and a specialization

besides law;
3) the law schools are much more efficient, they select their students from many

more applicants, and exercise high pressure on the students and teachers to
work hard every day, which in turn results in low failure rates.

Finally, the American system has one more feature that is at the same time an ad-
vantage and a disadvantage: students have to pay tuition for their higher educa-
tion. This can range from as little as $ 5-10,000 per year at public colleges to more
than $ 30,000 per year at the best private colleges and law schools. The olsadvant-
age of this system is not so much that only rich families can send their children to
university. First, there are many scholarship opportunities for top performing and/or
needy students. second, and more importantly, the large majority of students
nowadays finances their studies by taking loans from banks and specialized lend-
ing institutions. ln this way, higher education is generally open to everyone in spite
of the high cost. However, the disadvantage is that many students eveitually giad-
uate from law school with $ 100,000 and more in student loans that need to be re-
paid over time, and are thus forced to seek lucrative employment in large commer-



126

cial law finns, even if they would be more inclined towards a job in the public ad-
ministration or in the non-profit sector.
while the high fees are not exactly popular with the students they do provide the
educational institutions with the means that are needed in the 21it century to pro-
vide a world-class education with the best available professors, modern, ciean'and
pleasant buildings and classroorns, the latest lTequipment, well-stocked libraries,
plenty of individual attention for the students, and many more attributes that one
will not easily find in Europe. Finally, the fact that the students pay a lot of money for
their education, also makes them demanding customers who will carefully select
their school in order to get the best value for their money and who will keep pushing
every slngle professor and every person in the administration to give theiivery beJt
every day. unsurprisingly, the open door and can-do policy in American law
schools is, therefore, probably the most important difference to their German
and continental European counterparts where students are often treated more
as a disturbance by the professors than as valued customers and colleagues.

2. The American Bar Association

The ABA has over 400,000 members and is the largest professional organization in
the world. According to its mission statement, th; ABA ,,provides law school ac-
creditation, continuing legal education, information about the law, programs to as-
sist lawyers and judges in their work, and initiatives to improve the'legil system for
the public." Via its accreditation procedures, which involve the impolition of mini-
mum standards for and periodic review of all law schools, the ABAachieves a high
degree of transparency in legal education and facilitates the recognition of credits
and diplomas across the nation.
ln addition to the ABA, there are bar associations at state and local level.

3. Legal Professionals

As may be expected, we find American law school graduates in quite similar pro-
fessions as their German counterparts. The majority practices law as ,,Attorneys at
Law." Then there are judges and public prosecutors (staatsanwri/te), lawyers work-
ing as in-house counsel for larger corporations or public bodies, and a growing
number of lawyers in not-for-profit organizations.

A few differences to the Continental European systems shall be briefly mentioned.. Attorneys are admitted to the bar in one or more states after having passed the
bar exam for this or these state(s), as well as the admission criteriJ of the state
bar association(s). More than 50,000 new law graduates pass the bar exams in
the fifty states each year and altogether there are over 1 million lawyers admitted
to practice in the United States.

o Lawyers can move between the different legal professions much more easily
than it is customary in Europe. For example, an attorney'may be appointed
to a professorship at a law school, return to private practice after some years,
and later in life become a judge. Academlcs may leave university to practice law
or take up judicial or political appointments. lncreasingly, lawyers manage to
fulfill more than one function simultaneously.

. Attorneys may work as single practitioners, or as associates or paftners in law
firms. About a quarter of all attorneys work in large law firms that employ several



127

hundred lawyers and have offices in ditferent cities and states of the U.s. and
abroad.

o Federaljudges are appointed by the President and have to be confirmed by the
senate. state court iudges at the lower levels are usually elected by the loCd or
state population, while judges at the highest state courts are increasingly ap-

,pointed by the respective governors.
o Judicialappointments are usually for a limited term of four to ten years. Theo-

retically, this could cause concem about the independence of the judges but in
practice sitting judges are usually confirmed in office if they seek re-appoint-
ment. Appointments to all federal courts and some of the state courts are for life.o law teachers may be appointed straight out of law school. Many professors
never obtain more than the standard juris doctor, although an academic doc-
torate (Ph.D.) is nowadays an advantage for applicants. The first appointment
is usually on a "tenure track," a kind of probation period of some five to seven
years, during which the teaching and service record and the quantity and quality
of academic puhlications is monitored by other faculty rnembers. Upon suc-
cessful completion of this period, professors are tenured, i.e., appointed for life.
By contrast to German professors with Beamfenstatus, even tenured professors
can be removed from office if their performance becomes unacceptable.

lX. Finding American Law in Europe
The most convenient way of accessing American law from anywhere via the inter-
net is through the services of wesllaw or LexivNexis. However, these are fee-
based services that cannot be accessed without a user account and a password.
The u.s.federal constitution can be found on several "official" govemment web-
sites, for example at http://www.house.gov/constitution/constitution.html. For an
'gnofficiaf' publication with annotations see http://www.findlaw.com/casecode/
constitutior/.
Federal statutes are officially published in the United states code (u.s.c.).The
u.s.c. is published by the congress and can also be accessed on the internet
at http://www.gpoaccess.gov/uscode/, as well as at http://uscode.house.gov/
search/criteria.php. lt is also available "unofficially" on the internet - and sorne-
times with useful explanations and easier search functions, in particular athftp//
gqselaw.lp.findlaw.com/casecode/uscodes/toc.html, as well as at http://www.
law.cornell.edr./uscode/. Fufthermore, federarstatutes are commercidffiSiisFEl
in the form of the united states code Annotated (U.s.c.A.) and the united states
code service (u.s.c.s.). The former is published by wesflaw and the latter by Le-
xis/Nexis (Thomson, the owner of wesflaw, is also the operator of the ,.findlaw"
website). While allthree publications contain the official code, the commercialver-
sions also include references to case-law in which specific provisions of the Code
have been interpreted. An example of fonnally correot citation would be "42 u.s.c.
S'1983" (an important provision for civit rights).
Federal rules and regulations are published daily in the Federal Register and later
are codified in the Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.).
Recent case law of the United States Supreme Court is easily and freely accessible
fromtheOourtitself ath see
also the "unofficial"
htmt. By contrast, the full text of otoe@ as weil as



128

the case-law of the other federal courts, is less readily available unless one has ac-
cess to Westlaw and/or LexiVNexis.
The constitutions and statutes, as well as other primary law sources of the several
states can be accessed "officially" via their respective government websites, for
example at http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/index.html. Again, Findlaw offers a conven-
ient alternative, albeit "unoffical", see http://www.findlaw.com/casecode/index.
html/statelaw.
Via Google and other search engines, other sources of American law can be found
quite easily, in particular the websites of various law schools and law libraries.'

Llterature

BtumenwiZ, Dieter: Einf0hrung in das anglo-amerikanische Recht, 7th ed., Munlch 2003
8rest, Paul, et al.: Processes of Constitutional Decisionmaking - Cases and Materials, 4ft ed.,
New York 2000
Calleros, Charles R.: Legal Method and Writing, 4tn ed., New York 2002
Clayton, Cornell W. and Howard Gillman (eds.): Supreme Court Decision-Making - New lnsti-
tutionalist Approaches, Chicago'1999
Cohen, M, Fobert C. Bening and K. Olson: How to Find the Law, 9'n ed., St. Paul :1989
Cushman, Robert E.: Leading Gonstitutional Decisions, New York 1958
David, Ren6, and John E. C. Brierley: Maior Legal Systems in the World Today: An lntroduction
to the Cornparative Study of Law, 3d ed., London 1985
Farnsworth, E. Allan: An lrrtroduction to the Legal System of the United States, 3'd ed., New
York 1996
Flne, lbni M.: American Legal Systems: A Resource and Reference Guide, Cincinnati 1997
Ftetcher, George P. and Steve Sheppardl American Law in a Global Context - The Basics,
Oxford 2005
Henkin, Louis: Foreign Atfairs and the US Constitution, 2nd ed., Oxford 1996
McKeever, Robert J.: The United States Supreme Court - A Political and Legal Analysis, Man-
chester|997
Wren, Christopher G., and Jill Robinson Wren: The Legal Research Manual,2nd ed., Madison
1986

View publication statsView publication stats

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260164621

